---
layout: post
date: 2016-03-14
author: Marc van Eijk
title: Azure Resource Manager - Nested templates and sharing state
tags: ARM, Azure Resource Manager, nested, sharing state, object, variables, parameters
published: false
---
It is obvious to create a single deployment template for deploying a single resource. But the more advanced your deployment scenarios get, the more interesting it becomes to create a decomposed template design. 
Azure Resource Manager allows you to link templates, also referred to as nested templates.
 The following guidance helps to decide between a single template or a decomposed nested template design. 

- Create a single template for a single tier application
- Create a nested template deployment for a multitier application
- Use nested templates for optional deployment

## Nested templates

Within an Azure Resource Manager deployment template you can create a resource of the type `"Microsoft.Resources/deployments"`. This templateLink property in this resource  allows you to reference another deployment template. 

```
"resources": [
 {
 "name": "myNestedTemplate",
 "type": "Microsoft.Resources/deployments",
 "apiVersion": "2015-01-01",
 "properties": {
  "mode": "Incremental",
  "templateLink": {
   "uri": "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/marcvaneijk/arm/master/000-patterns/nested-sharing-state/nested/shared1.json",
   "contentVersion": "1.0.0.0"
   }
  }
 }
]
```

The template that is referenced in the templateLink is deployed as part of the initial (master) deployment. All resources, from both the master and the linked template, will be deployed to the same resource group. You can define multiple resources of the type `Microsoft.Resources/deployments` in a single deployment template, each pointing to a different nested template. This can be useful if you are deploying a multitier application. Each tier can have its own template that is referenced from the master template. The dependsOn function allows you to specify the dependencies for each resource referencing and individual nested template. Making smart use of the dependsOn function can drastically decrease the total time needed for the complete deployment (e.g. instead of deploying one tier at a time, deploy the vms in all tiers first and then execute the individual depending tier configurations).

### Remove hardcoded URI from resource

In the previous blog [Azure Resource Manager - Objects in variables](/2016/03/14/objects), we discussed grouping variables in objects. These objects can be very useful if you are working with nested templates. Define an object variable in the master azuredeploy.json that contains the absolute Uri of the repository folder. Add an relative path entry in that variable for each nested template you are using in your deployment. This gives a quick overview of the nested templates referenced in your resources. Store all nested templates in folder called `nested`. The templatelink in the resource combines the absolute Uri with the relative path. When you fork a repository you only need to update the absolute Uri in the variable object of the master azuredeploy.json file. 

```
"variables": {
 "template": {
  "base": "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/marcvaneijk/arm/master/000-foundation/examples/nested-sharing-state/",
  "nested1": "shared1.json",
  "nested2": "shared2.json"
 }
},
"resources": [
 {
 "name": "myNestedTemplate",
 "type": "Microsoft.Resources/deployments",
 "apiVersion": "2015-01-01",
 "properties": {
  "mode": "Incremental",
  "templateLink": {
   "uri": "[concat(variables('template').base, 'nested/', variables('template').nested1)]",
   "contentVersion": "1.0.0.0"
   }
  }
 }
]
```

### Optional nested template deployment

It is possible to deploy a nested template based on parameter input. The parameter input is used to concatenate the relative path to a nested template. Based on the user input a different template is deployed. This enables a conditional nested template deployment. The parameter is used to define the name of the template. Ensure the allowedValues of the input parameter match the names of the nested templates. 

```
"parameters": {
 "optionalResource": {
  "type": "string",
  "defaultValue": "configured",
  "allowedValues": [
   "configured",
   "notconfigured"
  ],
  "metadata": {
   "description": "Based on this value a different nested template is deployed"
  }
 }
},
"variables": {
 "template": {
  "base": "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/marcvaneijk/arm/master/200-nested/201-shared/",
  "optional": "[concat('optional_', parameters('optionalResource'),'.json')]",
 }
},
"resources": [
 {
  "name": "optionalNestedTemplate",
  "type": "Microsoft.Resources/deployments",
  "apiVersion": "2015-01-01",
  "properties": {
   "mode": "Incremental",
   "templateLink": {
   "uri": "[uri(concat(variables('template').base, 'nested/'), variables('template').optional)]",
   "contentVersion": "1.0.0.0"
   }
  }
 }
]
```

### Sharing state

The nested template have their own resources that can require parameters submitted by the tenant at deployment time. The tenant is only presented with the parameters from the master template. Luckily Azure Resource Manager allows you to pass values from the master template to the nested templates. The parameters that you want to pass to a nested template need to be configured at the resource level in the master template.

```
"resources": [
{
 "name": "myNestedTemplate",
 "type": "Microsoft.Resources/deployments",
 "apiVersion": "2015-01-01",
 "properties": {
  "mode": "Incremental",
  "templateLink": {
   "uri": "[concat(variables('template').base, 'nested/', variables('template').nested1)]",
   "contentVersion": "1.0.0.0"
   },
   "parameters": {
    "adminUsername": {
     "value": "[parameters('adminUsername')]"
    },
    "adminPassword": {
     "value": "[parameters('adminUsername')]"
    }
   }
  }
 }
]
```

Matching parameters should be defined in the nested template

```
"$schema": "https://schema.management.azure.com/schemas/2015-01-01/deploymentTemplate.json#",
"contentVersion": "1.0.0.0",
"parameters": {
 "adminUsername": {
  "type": "string"
  },
 "adminPassword": {
  "type": "securestring"
 }
}
```

### Strings

All the nested deployment templates I have seen, share state by specifying individual string values. For a couple of values this isn't a big issue, but the more parameters you are passing between templates the more complex it becomes to ensure the parameters specified at the resource level in the master template match the parameters in the nested template. 

Image (powerpoint) of parameter locations in the master and nested template

### Challenges

When the amount of parameters and number of template resources increase it can be very challenging to keep track of the parameters

Places that need to be updated when adding or changing a param/variable (ppt graphic)

### Object

It is also possible to group the parameters in a single object and reference the values directly from the object in the nested template without specifying parameters for that in the nested template.

**Pros**
Simpler to keep track of changes state that is shared between the linked templates

**Cons**
Not able to use the linked template for a separate deployment.

